---
layout: post
title: Garaged
date: 2017-02-13 21:12
author: willryle
comments: true
categories: [New Bolton, The Build]
---
It was October when I last <a href="https://willryle.wordpress.com/2016/10/09/building-again/" target="_blank">reported</a> on the progress of the garage. There were the usual delays, but the build itself was completed in December. It just remained for us to paint it all inside and that task has now been done. I'm not the only one that thinks it looks splendid...

<!--more-->

With copious amounts of undercoat to seal the plasterboard and paint leftover from the house build, we laboured over a number of weekends in December and the holiday period. The final touch was painting the floor with a concrete sealer paint. As every new workshop requires a work bench, the first job was making one with some reclaimed timber. Shelving has been added - and filled - and the pegboard obtained to make a home for some of the tools.

[gallery type="slideshow" link="file" ids="2360,2361,2362,2363,2368,2367,2366,2365"]

The garage features separate automated sectional doors, external lighting, interior LED strip lights, a manual sectional door to the workshop area with the whole being insulated to give a comfortable working environment regardless of summer heat or winter chill.

Astute reader will notice a glaring omission for a garage - motor vehicles. The remaining work to do is removal of the building spoil and laying a driveway, both of which prevent cars being driven in. Young Tim, last seen at New Bolton <a href="https://willryle.wordpress.com/2011/10/16/stumps-away/" target="_blank">digging up the tree stumps</a> and adding a layer of <a href="https://willryle.wordpress.com/2012/09/02/driveway/">aggregate to the driveway</a>, has been commissioned for this task and will be on site shortly. With that done our long-suffering van can take shelter from the paint-fading Wairarapa sun and the tractor can come in for a very overdue service.

Finally, the workshop is operational - barring a few more fitting out tasks - and with a long list of projects the next problem will be finding the time to do them.
